Once around Vesta. So this is another of
the asteroids which uh are a subject
that fascinates me. So I have a number
of these videos about different
asteroids out there in the region
between Mars and Jupiter. And it all
goes back to the celestial police and
the discovery in 1801 of the first
object in this Mars Jupiter regions. The
asteroid series about which I've done
another video. Uh this was discovered by
Piazi in the January of
1801 just scooping a group called the
celestial police who were very
suspicious that there was a missing
object in this region. And within a few
years, not only had we found series, but
several other objects in that zone. The
asteroids palace, Juno, and Vesta soon
turned
up. And it is Vesta, of course, that we
are interested in.
Now with seriesiries being discovered in
1801 and a year later palace Henrik
Albers suspected from the
uh alignment of the orbits of both of
those two asteroids at 2.77 astronomical
units and the fact that the orbits seem
to cross each other that they might be
fragments of a destroyed planet planet
number
five
and he decided that they should search
the region of sky where those two orbits
crossed to see if there were any other
fragments
lurking. And it worked because on the
29th of March of 1807, he happened
across
Vesta. This is a little image of Vesta
changing its position night to night.
It's just about visible to the naked
eye. You have to have very very good
observing conditions, but binoculars or
a small telescope and it makes it
trackable. So, Vesta was discovered and
the orbit was soon calculated to be
slightly closer in than the other a
known asteroids. Those were at 2.8 AU
right where the Titus Bode law had
predicted things. Vesta 2.3 a little bit
closer but in a fairly circular
planet-like orbit going around the sun
slightly tilted. Nothing really unusual
about that by this stage. And so we had
our fourth asteroid.
Now, it's been imaged by the Hubble
Space Telescope, and this is at the
extreme end of its capabilities to
produce a really high resolution
picture. But what you can see is the
somewhat irregular shape. It's not
spherical. There is something going on
on the lower right hand side. You can
see it seems to have got a flat surface
almost with a slight bump in the middle.
And that is the Rio Silver crater. more
of which we'll come
to. So what we now know about Vesta
number four with its planetary symbol
shown there next to the name. The fourth
asteroid discovered initially somewhere
estimated between 380 and 600 kilometers
across just based on observing the
brightness and guessing a sort of
average albido. the amount of light
reflected, the reflectivity of the
surface, it's somewhere in that range.
But in 1991, it conveniently passed in
front of a star and that was observed
with multiple instruments from multiple
observing points and gave us the ability
to time the duration of the eclipse of
that star, what's called an occultation,
very accurately along different lines of
advance. and from that produced the
measurements that showed that Vesta was
actually a somewhat elliptical shape
around about 550x 450 km. Well, we now
know it's elliptical in all three
dimensions. So 570x 560 and 450 along
the narrow uh axis, the polar axis. This
is too small for gravity to have
completely dominated the strength of the
material and pulled it into a completely
spherical shape. And so that's one of
the reasons it wasn't given dwarf planet
status unlike series. And the three
objects shown here are our moon, the
largest asteroid, series, and Vesta
there showing that somewhat more
irregular shape.
Now the Bourne spacecraft was sent to
Vesta. It was launched in 2007, arrived
in 2011 and spent a year in orbit around
Vesta before moving on to series
arriving in 2015 where it now remains.
And it took this rather interesting
route. So, it's launched from the Earth
and it did an Earth and a Mars flyby in
the process, getting a gravity assist
and arriving out there at the orbit of
Vesta and then leaving by firing up its
engines again, using its remaining fuel
to get into orbit around
series. And as a result, we have the
most fantastic images. So this is a
closeup as uh we have of Vesta on
approach showing that same structure the
uh elliptical nature of it and that bump
on the south pole region
there. So we were able to estimate the
mass of this object in three different
measurements. Actually, Dawn going into
orbit provided a very accurate reading,
but it was in agreement with a couple of
others where Veester had had a close
approach with a couple of other smaller
asteroids, one in 1966 and one in 2001,
that from the deflection caused to the
asteroid, we were able to estimate the
mass. And you got the numbers there, 2 *
10 20 kg. So, it's just 28% the mass of
series or 1.2% 2% the mass of our moon.
Pretty small, but it's actually a little
bit more massive than its size would
bely because the asteroid palace is
nearly the same size, but is 25% less
dense overall. So Vesta is unusual for
being a little bit over dense and a
little bit interior in terms of its
orbit orbiting a bit closer in towards
the inner solar system than the other
members of the uh the large asteroids.
So here we have Vesta with seriesiries
to its left, Palace nearly the same size
to its right and Hyia the uh fourth
largest but not the fourth discovered
that was Vesta the fourth largest
asteroid there. Those all other three
orbit just a bit further out and are a
bit less dense. We'll see
why. Well, what Dawn revealed was that
Vesta is a diversified world. What do I
mean by diversified? I mean it has an
iron core about 110 kilometers in radius
overlaying by a bassalt crust. So just
like the earth really and it would have
been molten in its early history for
around 10 million years.
The heat of formation and the heat from
the decay of radioactive materials, in
particular aluminium 26, in that core
would have raised the temperature way in
excess of the melting point of the
materials, and allowed the iron to
separate out and sink, being more dense,
down to the center, and float the rock
over the top of it, just as has happened
with the Earth, except being tiny, Vesta
has cooled and solidified.
pretty rapidly and so uh the core is now
completely solid rather than the liquid
metal outer core that we have on Earth
due to the larger size meaning the heat
takes much much longer to get
out. But I did say we would revisit the
rear silver crater and here it is. This
is a massive impact basin on the south
polear region of Vesta. Almost large
enough to have destroyed the asteroid
completely. It's 90% of the diameter of
the uh little world. 505 kilometers in
rad in diameter for this crater.
The central peak is 25 kilometers above
the average level and the rim 12. That's
enormous for something on a small world
like this. And the impactor must have
been very large indeed, smashing into
Vesta, penetrating deep inside it and
injecting a huge amount of material all
over the solar system. Some of it would
have fallen back onto Vesta, trapped by
the gravity of the small planettoid. Um,
but a lot of it would have been ejected
with escape velocity and would have then
made its way independently round the
solar system. And this probably happened
about a billion years
ago. We think Vesta formed along with
the other planets around 4.6 billion
years ago. So this was just a one
quarter of the object's age going back
in time. So for three quarters of its
time, this impact had not occurred. It
was fairly
recent. And it created this huge shotgun
blast of material going around the solar
system which we now call the Vesta
family of asteroids. If you look at the
asteroids in the asteroid belt, you can
classify them according to where they
orbit. So at 2.3 astronomical units for
Vesta, but also in terms of the other
parameters, the tilt and the
eccentricity of the orbit. And if you do
this, you could end up with groups of
asteroids, each named after one of the
large members of that asteroid family,
as it's known. So all those little red
dots next to the word Vesta are part of
the Vesta family. We know of over 15,000
of them all orbiting
round resultant from that giant impact
breaking
these thousands and thousands of
fragments off Vesta to go into uh orbit
roughly along the same trajectory around
the sun gradually getting perturbed and
spread out and some fractions getting
scattered all over the place.
The largest members, well, that's uh
you've seen they're 100 kilometers in
diameter. That's quite a large piece. Um
and the second largest piece there, 36
km, after which the sizes get really
quite
small. So all of that material is
whirling around the solar system and
some of the blast was scattered all over
the place and came in our direction. And
in fact 5% of the meteorites on Earth
are from Vesta from this one impact the
creation of the Ria silver
crater. We had these three classes of
meteorites called Howardites, ukrites
and
biogenites. And only by studying Vesta
in great detail with spectroscopy has it
been possible to identify that these are
all fragments of Vesta that have been
blasted into space and they've come from
different depths within the
diversification layers of Vesta. So we
have the upper crust, the midcrust, and
the crust mantle boundary down there
within the body of this asteroid where
it was blasted in a giant impact a
billion years ago. And all these pieces
have landed on the earth. We have a
couple of hundred of each of these
classes of meteorite. They were a real
mystery until we understood the nature
of Vesta properly.
But Vesta seems to have had a hard time.
There's another enormous impact basin
called the Venetia
crater, 400 km across, nearly as big as
the Ria silver crater. But underlaying
it, the uh this shows that it is older
and probably at least two billion and
maybe going back over four billion years
right back to the dawn of the planets.
such a large obact was this that it's
created ridges and fractures right round
onto the other side of the uh object. So
Vesta was nearly destroyed in this
impact. If it had been much larger, it
probably would have been. And the same
is probably true for the rear silver
impact. If that had been a very slightly
larger object that had hit Vesta, it
wouldn't have just made a massive
crater. It would have destroyed it
completely.
And these may have resulted in very
substantial melting of the uh layers of
Vesta as a result of these giant
impacts. And the history of that is
possibly written in the water content.
In my talk about series, I showed how
series was very wet, contains a very
large percentage of hydrogen locked up
as hydrates in the minerals,
particularly at the polar regions. You
can see it goes from 1.8 to
3.2% of the overall uh mass in the
surface layers is hydrogen. And so
that's a very very wet uh material
indeed. But Vesta is enormously dry. On
Vesta, the scale goes from zero through
to
0.04%. But there are regions, very small
regions scattered across Vesta that seem
to be where that water exists. It seems
that these are later deliveries of
water. a vesta having been thoroughly
melted and dried out at least on the
surface by the heat and energy released
by those enormous giant
impacts. And it wasn't until later, so
really very recently, that other
carbonacious, waterbearing, carbonrich
meteors have landed on the surface of
Vesta and delivered more water to this
interesting little world.
And talking of carbon, it seems there is
a lot of carbon on Vesta. I guess it
lost a lot of its water, but the
carbonri materials in the forms of soot
and graphite and so forth have stuck
around and around the edge of quite a
number of the craters, you get this dark
lining which indicates a carbonrich
origin uh to the uh material. And so
it's quite probable that this accounts
for why Vesta is a little bit over
dense. It probably these giant impacts
that it suffered have blasted away a lot
of the volatile material leaving only
the much more refractory uh hard
materials like the carbon and the rock
and uh obviously the metal core. So
fascinating little world and quite a
contrast to its larger sister series.
Now we call it an asteroid. It used to
be called a planet. And in 2006, the IAU
had a debate about all of this when some
of the bodies out there in the outer
solar system such as Maki Maki, Sednner,
Huame, Orcus, and so forth were
discovered and to whether to call all
these little worlds planets or not. and
they came out with a proposal. But one
of the proposals was that these smaller
solar system objects would be called
planets and that would have included
Vesta. It wasn't accepted probably
because it's so small and that it has
this large distortion caused by the two
giant impacts making it not round. And
uh the fact is that they it was hit
after it had solidified. So it wasn't
really able to thoroughly relax back
into a fully spherical shape. But I
think it's been a little bit hard by. I
think uh it perhaps deserves the dwarf
planet status as do some of these
others. So thanks very much for
listening. That was once around Vesta
and I hope you enjoyed it.